README.md, before:

# Whisper Decoder Unsupervised Training

Research project for training Whisper Large v3 decoder on Azerbaijani text data.

## Project Overview

This project extracts the decoder component from OpenAI's Whisper Large v3, trains it on Azerbaijani text data (DOLLMA dataset) using causal language modeling, and re-integrates it back into Whisper to improve ASR performance.

## Setup

This project uses [UV](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv) for dependency management.

```bash
# Install UV (if not already installed)
curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh

# Create virtual environment and install dependencies
uv venv
source .venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate
uv pip install -e ".[dev]"
```

## Project Structure

```
whisper_research/
├── pyproject.toml          # Project dependencies
├── README.md               # This file
├── configs/                # Configuration files
│   ├── model_config.yaml
│   ├── training_config.yaml
│   └── evaluation_config.yaml
├── src/                    # Source code
│   ├── model/              # Model components
│   ├── data/               # Data loading and preprocessing
│   └── evaluation/         # Evaluation and metrics
├── scripts/                # Executable scripts
├── notebooks/              # Jupyter notebooks
└── experiments/            # Training outputs and checkpoints
```

## Workflow

### 1. Extract Decoder
```bash
python scripts/01_extract_decoder.py --device cuda
```

### 2. Prepare Data
```bash
python scripts/02_prepare_data.py
```

### 3. Train Decoder
```bash
python scripts/03_train_decoder.py --device cuda
```

**Monitor training with TensorBoard:**
```bash
tensorboard --logdir ./experiments/runs
```
Then open http://localhost:6006 in your browser.

### 4. Integrate Decoder
```bash
python scripts/04_integrate_decoder.py \
    --checkpoint ./experiments/decoder_training/best_model.pt
```

### 5. Evaluate
```bash
python scripts/05_evaluate.py \
    --finetuned_model ./experiments/whisper_integrated
```

## Monitoring Training

This project uses **TensorBoard** for experiment tracking:
- Training and validation loss
- Perplexity metrics
- Learning rate schedules
- Real-time training progress

Start TensorBoard before or during training:
```bash
tensorboard --logdir ./experiments/runs
```

For W&B (optional), install separately:
```bash
uv pip install ".[wandb]"
wandb login
```
And enable in `configs/training_config.yaml`.

## Dataset

[DOLLMA](https://huggingface.co/datasets/allmalab/DOLLMA) - Large Azerbaijani text corpus

## License

MIT

Commit message:

refactor: simplify dataset loading workflow
BREAKING CHANGE: Remove complex data preparation pipeline

This commit simplifies the dataset loading workflow to work directly with
pre-prepared HuggingFace datasets. The 02_prepare_data.py script is no longer
needed.

Changes:
- Remove 02_prepare_data.py script (dataset preparation step)
- Refactor dataset_loader.py for direct HuggingFace loading
  * Remove DOLLMA-specific multi-config loading
  * Remove complex preprocessing and chunking logic
  * Add load_text_dataset() for simple dataset loading
  * Add prepare_texts() for basic text extraction
- Simplify preprocessing.py to minimal text cleaning
  * Keep only unicode normalization and whitespace cleaning
  * Remove language-specific and advanced preprocessing
- Update 03_train_decoder.py to load dataset directly
  * Remove pickle cache dependency
  * Add better logging and error handling
- Update training_config.yaml schema
  * Add text_column parameter
  * Add max_seq_length parameter
  * Remove advanced preprocessing options
- Update documentation
  * README.md with streamlined 4-step workflow
  * scripts/README.md with updated commands
  * Dataset requirements and configuration guide
- Update CHANGELOG.md with detailed change log

Migration Guide:
- Upload your pre-prepared text dataset to HuggingFace Hub
- Dataset must have a 'text' column (configurable)
- Update configs/training_config.yaml with your dataset name
- Skip the old step 2 (prepare_data), go directly to training

README.md, after:

# Whisper Decoder Unsupervised Training

Research project for training Whisper Large v3 decoder on Azerbaijani text data.

## Project Overview

This project extracts the decoder component from OpenAI's Whisper Large v3, trains it on Azerbaijani text data (DOLLMA dataset) using causal language modeling, and re-integrates it back into Whisper to improve ASR performance.

## Setup

This project uses [UV](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv) for dependency management.

```bash
# Install UV (if not already installed)
curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh

# Create virtual environment and install dependencies
uv venv
source .venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate
uv pip install -e ".[dev]"
```

## Project Structure

```
whisper_research/
├── pyproject.toml          # Project dependencies
├── README.md               # This file
├── configs/                # Configuration files
│   ├── model_config.yaml
│   ├── training_config.yaml
│   └── evaluation_config.yaml
├── src/                    # Source code
│   ├── model/              # Model components
│   ├── data/               # Data loading and preprocessing
│   └── evaluation/         # Evaluation and metrics
├── scripts/                # Executable scripts
├── notebooks/              # Jupyter notebooks
└── experiments/            # Training outputs and checkpoints
```

## Workflow

### 1. Extract Decoder
Extract the decoder component from Whisper Large v3:
```bash
python scripts/01_extract_decoder.py --device cuda
```

### 2. Configure Dataset
Update `configs/training_config.yaml` with your HuggingFace dataset name:
```yaml
dataset:
  name: "YOUR_USERNAME/YOUR_DATASET_NAME"
  text_column: "text"
```

### 3. Train Decoder
Train the decoder on your text dataset:
```bash
python scripts/03_train_decoder.py --device cuda
```

**Monitor training with TensorBoard:**
```bash
tensorboard --logdir ./experiments/runs
```
Then open http://localhost:6006 in your browser.

### 4. Integrate Decoder
Re-integrate the trained decoder back into Whisper:
```bash
python scripts/04_integrate_decoder.py \
    --checkpoint ./experiments/decoder_training/best_model.pt
```

### 5. Evaluate
Evaluate the improved model on ASR tasks:
```bash
python scripts/05_evaluate.py \
    --finetuned_model ./experiments/whisper_integrated
```

## Monitoring Training

This project uses **TensorBoard** for experiment tracking:
- Training and validation loss
- Perplexity metrics
- Learning rate schedules
- Real-time training progress

Start TensorBoard before or during training:
```bash
tensorboard --logdir ./experiments/runs
```

For W&B (optional), install separately:
```bash
uv pip install ".[wandb]"
wandb login
```
And enable in `configs/training_config.yaml`.

## Dataset

This project is designed to work with any HuggingFace text dataset that has a `text` column. Simply configure your dataset name in `configs/training_config.yaml`.

**Requirements:**
- Dataset must be hosted on HuggingFace Hub
- Must contain a `text` column with the training data
- Can be in any format (parquet, CSV, JSON, etc.)

**Example datasets:**
- [DOLLMA](https://huggingface.co/datasets/allmalab/DOLLMA) - Large Azerbaijani text corpus
- Your custom dataset: `username/dataset-name`

## License

MIT
